---
title: Mechanism
next: /guide/installation
previous: /guide/overview
---


# How It Works

Being a plug-in driven framework means that everything it does is done by plug-ins and that the surrounding library merely finds and triggers them at the opportune time. Let's have a look at how it does this.

Plug-ins are categorised by four distinct processes.

1. Selection
2. Validation
3. Extraction
4. Conform

Each process runs one after another, in this exact order.

### Selection

> Collection

Selection is the process of gathering information about the content you wish to publish. This information may be things such as the currently logged on user, the time of day and, perhaps most importantly, which part of a working file you are interested in sharing with others. You can think of it as a magnet.

For example, if your working file contains a three characters, `Richard`, `Tim` and `Peter`, you may wish to see `Richard` published. Each publishable element within your scene is called an `Instance`. An instance is an *instantiation* of content. Another way of looking at it is that once a file is loaded into a program, the file has become an `Instance`.

In this case, `Richard`, `Tim` and `Peter` are all instances. These instances are then collected into a `Context`. The context is singular throughout the lifespan of a single publish and represents all knowledge Pyblish has about your workspace.

### Validation

> The Gatekeeper

Validation is the step perhaps most associated with publishing. These plug-ins look at the information collected from Selection and *validates* it. A validation may be something like:

```
"Make sure all names end with a three-letter extension"
```

Validators are the gatekeepers of content.

### Extraction

> The Rock Carver

Once finished, the context will be passed on to Extraction. Extraction has one responsbility - get whatever has been collected during Selection and *extract* it from your application, typically onto disk. You can think of *this* as rock carving; persisting transient data onto disk.

However, Extraction can only occur if validation was successful. This is one of the key tenets of publishing. We only want data extracted if it lives up to the criteria set forth by your organisation.

Once `Richard` resides on disk, it is time for the final step of publishing.

### Conform

> Integration

Conform, also known as *integration*, is the process of integrating the extracted content into the rest of your pipeline. This includes placing the files where you typically store this kind of data, spheres in this case, and possibly register the event with a central database, such as an online task tracking solution. This step is synonymous to shipping or transportation.

## How Integrations Work

Now that we know a little bit about the process and how plug-ins work, let's talk about the integrations.

As content is generated by artists in a variety of software, it is imperative that Pyblish can be there to validate it. That is why only the most rudimentary of features ship with the base library of Pyblish, and more in-depth features come in any of its integrations.

See each integration for detailed information, in the next chapter, we will have a look at getting up and running with the one for Autodesk Maya.

- [Pyblish for Maya][maya]
- [Pyblish for Nuke][nuke]
- [Pyblish for Modo][modo]
- [Pyblish for Softimage][softimage]
- [Pyblish for Houdini][houdini]
- [Pyblish for Clarisse][clarisse]
- [Pyblish for 3ds Max][3ds]
- [Pyblish for Photoshop][photoshop]
- [Pyblish for Zbrush][zbrush]

[maya]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-maya/wiki/integration
[nuke]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-nuke/wiki/integration
[photoshop]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-photoshop/wiki
[zbrush]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-zbrush/wiki
[clarisse]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-clarisse/wiki
[3ds]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-3dsmax/wiki
[softimage]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-softimage/wiki
[houdini]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-houdini/wiki
[modo]: https://github.com/pyblish/pyblish-modo/wiki

All of these integrations operate under the same premise that all features are hosted within plug-ins and that you are free to either use, modify or extend them to fit your particular circumstance.
